---
layout: post
title: Hire a programmer who reads
---

Hire a programmer who reads.

A good book is knowledge distilled. Knowledge distilled from years of blood,
sweat and tears. When you read a book, you gain some of that knowledge. Every
gram of knowledge gained from a book is a drop of blood, sweat and tears saved.
Two actually: one of yours, and one of your colleague's.

If you hire a programmer who reads, you can't be lazy. They're used to seeing
very smart people present very polished technical points, in great detail. You
can't expect they'll be persuaded to your way of doing something because of your
gut feeling, or a sloppy technical argument. Make sure you're comfortable with
being challenged.

Programmers that read are used to having their technical viewpoint swayed by
superior technical reasoning. They have the attention span to let you make your
point. They'll endure the harshest criticism of their code, as long as it's
professional and on point. They'll listen to you fairly. And if you make your
case, they'll make the change and adopt your view, without any hard feelings.

Programmers that read don't reinvent the wheel. They know how many smart people
there are out there, and that at best, they're one of those people. They know
that they can go further standing on the shoulders of giants.

<!-- Programmers that read don't cause race conditions in code, because they read about the difference between `volatile` and `atomic` in C++. They don't cause memory leaks, because they read about how to use smart pointers. Their metaprograms aren't a disaster, because they read about the idioms the experts use. Even metaprogramming is manageable if you read. -->

They don't regard new things with automatic suspicion. Anytime there's something
new created, there's generally something new written about it. They read to help
make up their mind. They also know that not much is really new: nihil novi sub
sole. Most ideas are already there, floating around in the right books or
papers.

Make sure you treat them well, because they'll always have alternatives.
Programmers that read are always in demand, and will always be in demand.
Technologies may rise and fall; but the willingness of a small handful of people
to endeavor to condense knowledge into print has been with the human race since
the dawn of writing. It will outlast your stack, and your lifetime. Anyone who's
able and willing to learn from those people always has a bright future.

One day you may see them, at their computer, lost in thought instead of busily
typing away. They're thinking about some really subtle point in a book they just
read. Hey, you say to them. Come on, we have a deadline, pick it up. They'll
snap out of it, agree with you, and get back to work.

Programms that read usually also watch high quality videos, and ready high
quality blog posts. Information comes in all forms. But they also know that you
can only get out what was put in. A good blog post may be written in a week, a
good presentation may be prepared in a month. But a good book takes years to
write.

Hire a programmer who reads. They won't just bring the immediate benefit of the
code they'll write. They're excited to talk about what they've read. They'll
talk to other people, get them excited, get challenged, and learn from each
other.

Don't just hire one programmer who reads. Hire as many as you can. Build an
organization where people are excited to learn, excited to take the best ideas
they can find so they can do the best work they can do. Your team will never be
the same again.

Better yet, hire a programmer who writes.
